First of all, the obvious question is how you got involved in professional
writing. Just a little background. It's one of those terribly long and dull
stories, and I'll give you the short version as best I can. When I was a kid I
got rheumatic fever. This was in Cincinnati. And I was about 13 years old. And
in effect, for something on the order of two years, I was out of school. And
basically all I could do to stay relatively sane was to read. And I read
everything and anything I could get my hands on. And as I guess is true of
something like 90% of all science fiction writers in the world, I hit Edgar Rice
Burroughs because that's about all there was at that time and was just
fascinated by the Mars books I wrote a letter to Burroughs by the way and got an
answer back and I still got the letter somewhere and because of the addiction to
Burroughs one time when I was in a newsstand I saw a copy of the big old, fat,
Amazing stories. And it had a cover story by Burroughs called Tiger Girl. And
also a story by Eando Binder. You remember him? Or rather, you remember them,
Earl and Otto, called Adam Link Saves the World. Anyway, I bought the copy of
Amazing because I wanted to read the Burroughs story. And I figured, well, I
might as well read all this other stuff too. And there was a story in there by
Edmund Hamilton called Treasure on Thunder Moon, which I read and was
immediately hooked. I thought this was the greatest thing I had ever read, maybe
the greatest thing anybody had ever written. And I decided, well, by golly, the
thing to be is to be a professional writer and to write science fiction. And I
got a second-hand portable typewriter. And I taught myself to type And I wrote
something every week between the time I was 14 and when I was 21, when I sold my
first story, and sent it all off. Editors were just immensely helpful. I never
got form rejection slips, even at 14 years old. And you can imagine the kind of
junk you were writing at 14. But people like Sam Merwin, for example, would
write me little notes, we can't use this but keep trying and so forth. And in
effect, what really happened was that I got hooked on science fiction and I just
thought science fiction writers must be gods and I wanted to be one. I figured
that's as close to a god as I could get. So I went at it and I kept writing
until I sold my first story and I've sold every one I've written since. You did
your MA pieces on science fiction, did you? Yes, I did. What was that? Any
particular thesis to it, just briefly? Well, the deal was that I took an M.A.
degree at the University of Texas under Harry Ransom, whom you may know or may
have heard of. You know, Harry later became Chancellor of the UT System. and
Harry was not only a marvelous teacher but he was somebody who was open to new
ideas and encouraging students to do the kind of things that they were
interested in and he asked me what I wanted to do since I was more or less
committed to doing an MA in English with a minor in anthropology and I said well
what I want to do is I want to write on science fiction And in particular, I
want to write on magazine science fiction. And he said, okay, have at it. And so
I did it. And as far as I know, correct me if I'm wrong, I think it was the
first academic thesis that was ever written on science fiction with an emphasis
on magazine science fiction. And I talked about Heinlein, Bradbury, people like
that. And it's still gathering dust up in the archives of the UT Library
someplace. Then why didn't you, uh I would have expected at that point You'd
probably become an English teacher Or a professional writer full time Or
something like that Actually, I was, briefly After I got my MA I taught English
At the university for one year And There were two troubles That were involved in
that situation From my point of view, I don't know what troubles The students
had But the two troubles were, basically, that by the time I had started to
teach English, I was so much into anthropology that I already knew that that's
what I wanted to do. And I really was just teaching the English because I had
told Ransom I would. And the other aspect of it was there's nothing like
teaching freshman English for a year to convince you that that's not what you
want to do for the rest of your life. So that was the end of it. I left, then
went to UCLA to graduate school in anthropology. I know that doesn't answer the
question about why I didn't become a full-time professional writer, but I'm not
sure I can answer that question. Tony Boucher once said to me, sooner or later
you're going to have to choose, and I never did, and I suppose that one reason
was that I was, particularly at that time when I was 100 years younger than I am
now. I was just as interested in anthropology as I was in writing, and I really
wanted to teach anthropology. And so I tried to do both, doubtless, with
indifferent success. How do you divide yourself now? Are you still the chairman
of the department there? Yeah, I'm not sure that still is the word you want.
Actually, I was chairman of the department of anthropology, from 1967 to 1971.
And when I resigned, I swore I would never do it again under any circumstances
whatsoever. And so here I am in the third year of my second chairmanship. And I
figure I've got one year to go. And then somebody else is going to take over.
And hopefully I can get back to writing, not on a full-time basis, but I can
sure write more than I can when I'm tied up with a chairmanship. It's really a
full-time job.
I think I know the answer to this, but let me ask anyhow. Is writing a hobby, a
love, or are you in it just for the monetary aspect of it? Have you ever had
anybody who answered that question by saying, well, I'm just in it for the
money? Yeah, Jack Vance. Really, Jack Vance? I think he was kidding me. Yeah, he
was kidding me. No, I really think that writing is something you have to do. And
at any rate, that's the way it is with me. When I go a certain length of time
without writing anything or trying to write something, I get actually physically
uncomfortable. And it's definitely a labor of love. I don't think of myself as
an anthropologist who occasionally writes a story. I think that way down deep,
wherever it is, I really live. What I am is a writer who got interested in
anthropology rather than the other way around. And it means more to me, I think.
It's more gratifying to me than anything else I do. I just sold a story to
Analog, a story called Ghost Town. It's going to be out in either the September
or October issue. And I really, you know, I was thrilled when Analog bought it.
And it's almost like I'd never sold a story before. And it's infinitely more
important to me than the other things I do. Have you purposefully used science
fiction to communicate anthropological in theory? To some extent, but it was
certainly nothing that I sat down and planned, you know, like here's an
effective way to teach anthropology, that I'm going to do it through science
fiction. I really think that the actual truth of the situation is that any
writer writes about the things that they know, And one of the things that I knew
was anthropology. And so it's more or less natural that a fair amount of my
fiction is rooted in anthropology. But by no means all of it. And particularly
in the shorter fiction, the stories that I like the most, I don't know whether
anybody else likes them or not, tend to be stories that don't have anything to
do with anthropology at all. Although, you know, I don't mean to go on about
this unduly and just stop me if I'm rattling on too far. But anthropology and
science fiction frequently ask much the same kinds of questions. Among them,
what does it mean to be human, and where have we been, and where are we going?
And it seems to me that if you're involved seriously in either field, you tend
to sort of slop over into the other one. And I would guess, I don't know whether
anybody's ever actually counted it up. But I suppose something like 50% of my
fiction, perhaps, is rooted directly in anthropology. But there's 50% that
isn't. Of course, when you read the histories of science fiction and so forth,
you're often given credit for being the first one to introduce serious
anthropological things. So I guess you're sort of known for it. Yes. And I
suppose I have the, I guess it's a unique distinction of having a science
fiction book that was actually reviewed in the American Anthropologist. That was
Shadows in the Sun that was reviewed by Evan Vogt of Harvard when it first came
out and made the point that it was the first novel, as far as he knew, that had
used modern science fiction in its construction. But again, I don't think it was
anything deliberate. It's just that I was personally involved in anthropology at
that time, and so it would really be rather surprising if none of it seeped into
the fiction. Then you'd have a situation where there's no connection at all
between the sort of person you are and what you do and what you write, and
that's a bad deal. Yeah, I thought probably that to me the book that was most
specifically tied to anthropology was Giants in the Dust. I'm not sure you'd
agree with that or not. but the question I had on that was you have Barnum stop
agriculture and the domestication of animals at one point in that novel. That
would effectively stop civilization if it would not. Yeah. You're asking why did
I do that? I think I know why, but I'm just... Well, actually, the funny thing
about Giants in the Dust, there are lots of funny things about Giants in the
Dust, including the fact that that's not my title and I haven't the faintest
idea of what Giants in the Dust means in the context of that particular novel. I
called it Go Back, Go Back. But it's about a kind of anthropology that most
people are not familiar with. Almost all the anthropology in science fiction
comes out really of the old Franz Boas Ruth Benedict cultural relativism
position. There's a whole new school in anthropology, if you can call it a
school, and not just in anthropology because it gets into sociobiology and all
sorts of things, which states in effect that there's more to human beings at
birth than just being the traditional tabula rasa, that there's some things
built in. What I was trying to do in Giants in the Dust or what was going on
there was really to take the old deal about suppose you took 50 people 25 male,
25 female and you cast them away on the traditional desert island. What would
happen to them if they could somehow survive from infancy and grow into
adulthood? And one possibility that hasn't been considered is that we have a
kind of culture building device within us and that we would recreate a good deal
of culture much more quickly than is usually assumed. And I was playing around
with that idea in Giants in the Dust. And the reason why Varnum stops these
various inventions and things is because he wants to give it time to unfold to
see what will happen. But you may recall Varnum is the only character in the
book who retains any memory. And at the end of the book, he finally decides that
ethically the only thing he can do is to tell him, tell the other people what he
remembers of the culture back on earth and to give them a fairer shot at what's
going on. So you weren't saying then that we should not have developed
civilization? No, I wasn't. I think you can construct an argument to the effect
that people in other kinds of societies, particularly hunting and gathering
societies have some things that we don't have? It's not all one-sided.
Civilization is not an unmixed blessing. And people who live in those band type
of societies, they tend to be freer from stress. They tend to have fewer
emotional problems than people who live in societies such as our own. and so I
don't think it's a completely insane argument to say you know maybe we'd all be
better off if we were still hunters and gatherers but no it's not a position I
would advocate because I don't think it's a it's not a realistic proposition
outside the world of fantasy I'd rather look at it in terms of understanding
where we are and how we got to be this way and facing up to the issue that
whatever problems we have, we're going to have to learn to live well. Another
work, I guess this is a fairly recent one. I think it was analog. Meanwhile,
back on the reservation. I'm glad somebody read this story. I liked it too. I
guess, again, to me that was sort of connected to anthropology and the idea that
if we have, it's almost like we're splitting into two species. The spacers and
the earthers, I guess. I can't remember your exact terms. Do you think something
like that would happen when we try to call an eye space? I think it's possible.
Really the genesis of meanwhile back on the reservation was two-fold. And one
was simply the kind of reaction that builds up in you when everybody talks
about, Hey, you know, here's the glorious future coming onward to the stars,
everybody. when you stop and realize everybody's not going, and in fact 99.99%
of the human population will live and die on this planet. And you've got to
wonder, well, what about them? Aren't they people too? And it's anthropological,
I think primarily in the sense of they're in the same boat that so-called
primitive peoples are on this planet today, that the march of culture, for one
of another term, has passed them by to some extent. And they're sort of islands
that are left in the stream and left behind, and yet they have all the problems
of living the face that anybody else does. And I was just trying to raise the
question, well, alright, what about the people who stay behind? Do we just write
them off? Are they ciphers? Or aren't they just as important as somebody that
goes off to Alpha Centaurus or someplace? The other thing that was involved in
that story was that I had not written any short fiction in a while. And I got
mixed up with the Turkey City Group in Austin, which has been a source of untold
joy in my life. And a number of people who were involved in that group, Lisa
Tuttle and Howard Waldrop and a number of others, had urged me to try to do
something again, not wait so long between stories. And meanwhile, back on the
reservation is actually the first story I ever wrote that I submitted to a
criticism from other writers. And I learned a lot from them. And it was a very
rewarding experience. And I can't tell you what a thrill it is for me to be
living in some place like Austin and to find a whole colony of professional
science fiction writers there, and not just there, but the fact that they're so
good. You know, for something like 20 years, I was all alone in Texas. The
closest thing there was to a science fiction convention or gathering in the old
days was when Walt Miller and I got together for a six-pack of beer in Kyle. but
now, and this is a brand new experience for me. It's comparable only to the
situation I was in when I was in Los Angeles in graduate school. Ray Bradbury
and Chuck Beaumont and Bill Nolan and Dick Matheson and all of us would get
together and talk about stories, but we never criticized each other's
manuscripts in a more or less formal session like that. Instead, you know,
somebody would write something and if there was somebody they liked, they'd take
a, hey, look at this, you know, you think I can do anything with it? And then 20
years, more or less, by myself, really.
Okay, let me just go on to another one here. I'm not sure of this, but I assume,
I think, I got the impression that the novel The Shores of Another Sea was
probably based somewhat on your own experiences? Yes, it was. The Shores of
Another Sea is at least rooted in the 17 months or so that I spent in Kenya in
East Africa when I was on a research job with a people called the Kanba. And
some aspects of the shores of another sea are real, some are invented as is true
in any fiction, but to be specific the storm and the rains and the isolation
that form a major part of the shores of another sea that all happened and i was
marooned for a period of some weeks at what was that i forget what i called it
in the novel i may even have used its real name which was the derajani research
station And when those rains came down, they simply knocked out all
communications. And the thought just occurred to me. You know, suppose you were
going to contact this earth, and you had to begin somewhere. Would you really
plunk your ship down in the middle of New York City the way they always do? or
would you try it first in a controllable type of situation where you could deal
with small numbers and related species and wouldn't it be interesting if you
started off with some other form of primate like a baboon and that's where the
shores of another sea came from but if you go back and read the book or at least
if i go back and look at it what i see are all kinds of detailed memories of
what actually happened in kenya right down the level of the pipe tobacco I was
smoking there which was called sweet nut and came in a yellow tint and was
perfectly awful that flavor that personal whatever you want to talk texture
comes through I felt that when I was reading it somehow you did through part of
this yourself no I had I
got also the impression that perhaps you especially at the end when I forget the
protagonist his name i suspect i forget it too but i'll take a guess all right
let's call him royce crawford right that's good okay when royce does not shoot
the wall he chooses not to shoot that huge water that's right um but somehow you
were speaking of the let's say the brotherhood of all creatures on this earth
say and royce realizes that because of his experience experiences with alien
somebody off the earth sure sure uh the scene in which the would-be hunter
finally has a chance to shoot the animal that he's always dreamed about and
elects to let it go free that's an analog of what is going on in the rest of the
book as well which is you have an opportunity or you encounter aliens. And if
you simply treat them the way one human being hopefully might treat another
under the best of circumstances, maybe this kind of encounter is going to hold
more promise than either a situation where they come out with ray guns blasting
or one where there's some involved Machiavellian plot. The notion that I was
really playing around with there was simply maybe the level of communication is
going to have to take place on the level of look, there's some good in us,
there's some good in you, let's try to find the common ground. That's one reason
I was particularly annoyed with the jacket copy on the shores of another sea. It
seemed to me that what I was trying to say was directly antithetical to what the
blurb on And the cover says which, as I remember, has got something like, Well,
it's killing time for the big cats, you know. I have a sordid history in
publishing of unfortunate experiences with jacket blurbs.
Okay. My favorite work of yours, I think this is probably just a personal
choice, obviously, is The Winds of Time. I don't know why. I think maybe it's
the – I know why. It's because it's about trout fishing. Yeah, but I
think it was one of the first books I read where the aliens are just like –
well, they're almost just like us. They're sympathetic. And I kept expecting
some – of course, I didn't expect it because you started with the aliens. I
don't know, some big difference to show up, some horrible thing. but in fact
West becomes one of the aliens. He becomes one of them. Yeah. And that impressed
me. I don't know why. It just got to me. I guess you did that... Well, I'm
delighted that you like the book, and there are several things that I would say
about it. The things I like in Winds of Time actually have very little to do
with its science fictional aspects. I like the description of Lake City because
it's a place I'm very fond of. I like the part that's set in Los Angeles because
it's a house that I really lived in things like that that writers put in their
books that are of no interest whatever to other people but to come back to the
point you were talking about I've often been criticized as a writer for the very
point that you mentioned actually that my aliens are not as alien as some other
writers aliens are and if anybody can unscramble the syntax of that sentence
they're welcome to try It's really what I think of as the what do you say to a
lobster syndrome Contact to me if it's going to be interesting is going to have
to be contact With life forms that are enough like us So that there's something
to say If there is that commonality It would seem to me that it's just as
possible that we might be absorbed into their way of looking at things as the
other way around. The aliens that really interest me, and I'll just come right
out and say it, the aliens that interest me are people. They are people in
different guises, people that perhaps look a little different or talk
differently or have different backgrounds, but they have a core in them that we
can touch and identify with. Of course, this gets us back to anthropology. where
you have different cultures, different life ways, but underneath there are
people. And maybe the major problem on this planet is how do we touch this
common core between us? How do we get past these superficial differences? And if
you really got past the superficial differences and you found that you were
fundamentally different, as different as we are from a lobster, for example, my
own guess is that what you would have is not so much conflict, but the total
lack of interest on either side. Who wants to spend eternity with a lobster?
Okay, I don't suppose you actually believe this. I'm sure it was a plot device,
but you did have the danger always in the background there that, not the danger,
but I guess throughout the universe, that cultures had been destroying
themselves, and that the aliens thought that maybe the Earth would be a place
where it didn't happen. Yeah. You're back on Winds of Time, right? Oh, yeah.
Okay. Yeah. Okay. Or you're still on Winds of Time. Yeah. All right. But I mean,
that's not a—I imagine you, as a national publisher especially, worry about
that. I'm not worried about think about it. I think, as best I can recall, if
you go back and think about the time that the—no pun intended—that the Winds of
Time was being written and the time I was thinking about it. It's the same
problem that we're still afflicted with at the present time, and in a way it was
more acute then. Namely, here we've got nuclear devices, and we have the power
to destroy all life on this planet. Does it have to happen? Is there any
alternative at all. And I've been accused of being an unreconstructed optimist,
and I suppose there's some element of truth in it. I like to think of myself as
an optimist with my fingers crossed. But the point that I was trying to make was
given that potential for destruction and assuming that it had happened not just
once but over and over again, if you were in that kind of a situation, Wouldn't
you look for a situation where it had not happened, where we didn't blow
ourselves to smithereens and see is there something we can learn from that? And
if I can indulge myself very briefly in one of those I told you so comments,
we're still here. You may have noticed that. We're talking this afternoon. And
at the time I wrote The Winds of Time, there was a rather considerable body of
thought to the effect that we could not possibly be here in 1983. Nonetheless,
we are, and I suspect we'll be here 20 years in the future as well. There was a
reference in that novel, I think it was published, if I remember, in 51. I
imagine you were writing in the 50s. I think you're wrong. Really? Forgive me,
but if memory serves and memory often does not serve, Miss Zidane came out in
1952, and that's my first novel. And then there were several that intervened, so
I would guess that The Winds of Time would be somewhere around 1957. Okay, I'm
forgetting that. if I'm wrong you know it's no major matter but let's guess
1957. Well my question is going to be I guess it still is slightly valid but it
seemed to me the aliens and they took a picture with what sounded like a
Polaroid camera I'm not sure you even remember this but they took the guy so I
don't know what the aliens said to the west it's going to be developed in a
minute or something I swear Polaroid cameras were in existence back then you
were just quite quite honestly I won't lie to you I don't I don't remember the
scene, I don't remember whether Polaroid cameras were in existence at the time.
And so the only way I can answer that is to say I have to pick an answer right.
And so the answer I will pick, and I want to emphasize it is entirely fictional,
what I'm doing now is lying. The Polaroid camera had not yet been invented but I
predicted it in that novel. Okay. That's good now. Let me see how this will
happen. Okay. Are we doing okay by the way, Stilley? Whatever. Okay. A little
bit more on your work. The story King of the Hill that you had published in the
In Dangerous Reasons, that was a little on Oliver-like, I guess. That story, the
style of it I'm speaking of. You mean the mood of it? The mood, yeah. the the
narrator so forth uh i guess that was done deliberately it was to some extent uh
after all i wrote uh king of the hill uh specifically at harlan ellison's
request for again dangerous visions and what he was looking for was not sort of
a bland tale of optimism but something with a cutting edge to it and this this
goes back to what we were talking about earlier in terms of trout fishing, I was
very much filled and sickened by what's happened to all the lovely places on
Earth that I know that I had spent literally years fishing for trout in the
wilderness and seeing it cluttered up with beer cans and trash of all kinds. And
just literally sickened with the whole idea of pollution, and that's the genesis
of King of the Hill. But I think there's more to it than that. I think
stylistically and to some extent in terms of mood, it's a reflection, among
other things, of the fact that I'm not the same person that I was when I wrote
Shadows in the Sun and Mists of Dawn. I'm older, things have happened to me. And
I suppose that we all tend to get a slightly more jaundiced viewpoint as we
totter on towards senility. And some of that creeps into King of the Hill. I
like this story myself and I'll even go further apart from what might seem to be
a somewhat bitter tone. Although I don't really look at it that way. You know,
life does go on in King of the Hill. It's just that it's the raccoons that go on
instead of apart from the bitter tone. I think there's some fairly funny stuff
in King of the Hill. And one aspect of my work that nobody ever comments on is
the humor in it. And if I had to go back, you know, if I have to read things for
example to audiences I invariably pick something that I think is funny something
that I've written sometimes the audience thinks it's funny sometimes not but it
is an aspect of of my fiction that hardly anybody ever comments on maybe with
good reason but I'm not I'm not really all that serious a person When you come
in to contact me, you know, I don't tend to sit around and pontificate about the
fate of the universe. Do I?
Would you say that Shadows in the Sun is probably your best-known novel? Yes.
With one possible exception, which is The Wolf is My Brother, which is not
science fiction, but it's the only award I've ever won in writing, And I think
it's terribly ironic that the only thing I ever wrote that was not science
fiction is the one that won the award. But, so, I suspect illustrates a kind of
truism that you find not only in science fiction, but in American literature in
general. and it is simply that unfortunately your earliest book tends to be the
most powerful thing you ever write it's it's a sad truth to come up against but
you run into it so many times that it's difficult to avoid the reality of that
situation shadows and the sun was not my first book but it It was my first adult
novel. And that tends to be the time when you say whatever it is that you have
to say, and you tend to say variations on the same thing from then on. None of
us like to face that. I know when I first met Dick Mathison, I complimented him
on how much I like Born of Man and Woman and got the same comment back from him,
you know, look, I've written 100 stories since Born a Man and Woman. That's the
only one anybody ever talks about. But I think we're all stuck with that, that
when we're young, when we're fresh, when we're new, we tend to make the most
powerful statement that we make, and I'm afraid maybe that's true as shadows in
the sun, but I'll keep on trying to prove myself wrong. Was that, I think in the
novel, the town was called Jefferson Springs, if I remember? That's correct. Was
that based on any particular town? Oh, sure. Jefferson Springs, the title,
incidentally, part of it comes from the town in East Texas where my wife was
born. That's Jefferson, Texas. And part of it is the town that was right down
the road from where Jefferson Springs really is. That was Correza Springs.
Jefferson Springs is Crystal City, Texas, where I went to high school. And in
terms of the description of the town in the book, I made no effort to disguise
it. That's what I'm talking about. And I think really one of the best things in
Shadows in the Sun is the depiction of what life in Texas at that time was like.
That's what I like about it. Yeah, no, I respond to that texture, too,
definitely. Just sort of an overall big question here. Oh, a biggie. In much of
your fiction, you tend to show man's, say, his destructiveness, the way he can
destroy the earth and himself, cultural manipulation of other cultures, things
like that. Some of the bad aspects of civilization. From an anthropologist's
point of view, isn't that all sort of natural? What else can a species do? Well,
don't you think that there is a kind of romanticism that threads itself through
the whole texture of anthropology professional anthropologists don't like to
admit this but if you don't have a streak of the romantic in you why would you
go off to the ends of the earth and live for years studying a kind of life way
that nobody really cares much about there is that aspect to it i think that
studying the whole history of the human animal on this planet it's difficult to
avoid the conclusion that there were periods, there were epochs, there were
lifeways that were much more satisfying to live in than the kinds of human
apples that we find ourselves embedded in at the present time. And sure, there's
that aspect that civilization adds complexity And there's more to it than that.
The real thread that runs through this conversation is trout fishing. What do
you get out of being by yourself on a trout stream anyway? It's not catching a
fish. It's certainly not killing a fish. It's somehow getting out from under all
these layers of things that we're afflicted with in the cities that we live in
and getting in touch with our roots as an animal. And after all, we are animals.
But I have to come back to the statement that even though this is a motif and
I'm quite conscious that it runs all through my work, I can't help it, it's
something I emotionally respond to. you. Nonetheless, I recognize we can't
really go back. We are stuck with this civilization of ours. And ultimately, the
task we have before is we've got to somehow make it work. Okay, I got about
seven to ten minutes left. Can we handle it? Are we okay? I'm not sure if you
have somebody to get to at two o'clock or not. You okay? Yeah, that's alright.
I'll go. David, are we going to take? About seven? Yeah. You're never going to
get this in three five-minute segments. No. I'll probably get some time. Okay. I
will try. The non-fiction, I'm sorry, non-science fiction work you wrote, I'm
sorry I have not read The Wolf is My Brother, why did you decide to try Western?
Well, let me say, first of all, I think The Wolf is My Brother is by far my best
novel. However One goes about judging The quality of a An novel I think it is
The construction of it Is better I think the writing is better I'm more
satisfied With it than anything I've ever done And as a matter of fact One of
the Next books next novels that I want to write Is going to be a kind of western
It's going to be about Bentine, I don't know whether you're familiar with
Bentine or not. But Bentine was one of the survivors of Custer's last stand, and
I wanted to try it from that point of view but I'm not answering your question.
Why'd I try it? One of my fields in anthropology of course is the Plains
Indians. I teach a course on the Plains Indians. One of the themes of my science
fiction has been contact between one culture and another. Here's the classic or
one of the classic contact situations in anthropology and in history, the
collision between the Plains Indians, in this case the Comanche, and the later
Americans. I think it really would have been rather strange if I had never tried
to, uh, convert that sort of, uh, interest or experience into fiction, and so I
did, and there's another dimension to it also. It, uh, we're back to trout
fishing again. Uh, I'm interested in the land and the things that grow on it and
the animals that live in it, and this, this was one way of getting at it from
two different perspectives, really. It's not just us versus the Comanche, which
is, of course, your classic corny idea, but the two protagonists in that novel,
and it's constructed in a way that it cuts back and forth between them. The
Indian, whose name is Foxclaw, and the cavalry officer, whose name is Curtis,
they are both caught up in the same inexorable series of events. And one of the
points I was trying to make in there is that underneath the superficial
differences, again, you know, feathers in the hair, brass buttons on your coat,
or what have you, Foxclaw and Curtis were very similar kinds of people. And they
thought about things in very much the same way. And yet they were caught up in a
situation where they literally could not communicate. There's a scene in the
book where the cavalry officer and the Comanche Indian actually meet. And when
they meet, it suddenly dawns on both of them, they can't say anything to each
other. One speaks Comanche, one speaks English. And there is that kind of gulf
between them. And I realize I'm rather far afield from your question, But if I
had to totter off to my grave and just leave one book behind me, that's the one
that would be. It would be The Wolf of My Brother. You answered about three of
my questions with that, which do you consider your best work? I would obviously
answer that one. But I was going to ask how it relates to your science fiction,
but it would because the communication between the commensals and the cavalry,
communication between aliens and animals or aliens. Yeah. They're having a
conference at a college in California next week, actually. The conference is
called Contact. And it is literally the relationship between anthropology and
science fiction and what anthropologists can bring to science fiction writers
that they can use in their contact stories. And, of course, when I heard about
this conference, they wrote me a letter and said they forgot to invite me to the
conference. And they belatedly wrote me a letter and said they felt rather as
though they had had a celebration honoring the formation of the United States,
and they forgot to ask George Washington. And after all, you know, I invented
this story, and I've written a lot of them. And next year I'll give the
equivalent of a kind of guest of honor speech at the contact conference. This is
another weird situation where just as I was alone in Texas as a science fiction
writer for so long. You know, Walt Miller was just here for a few years. I was
also alone in anthropology for many years in terms of saying, look, we can use
these ideas in lots of ways. even on a kind of a literal level, if you're going
to have a USS Enterprise you really ought to have an anthropologist on there
because what you're doing is encountering different cultures and now all of a
sudden, I find myself in the midst of groups of people who are doing the same
thing that I was doing by myself years ago and I guess I'd have to say, in all
honesty that it's kind of gratifying. It's a lot better than finding out, or not
finding out, that somebody was interested in what you were doing after you're
six feet under. Robert Hechtman I would have the only other science fiction
writer I can think of offhand who uses anthropology specifically and well in
science fiction is Ursula Le Guin. Can you think of any others? Well, there are
many science fiction writers who have used elements of anthropology in their
stories. Michael Bishop does, for example. Paul Anderson knows a fair amount
about anthropology as well. But I think it's more deeply ingrained in Ursula
Gwynne, and of course the reason is the K in her name stands for Krober, who was
one of the deans of American anthropology so she's got to coming in to her from
both directions, so to speak. What about the changes you've seen in the field
since you started writing? Have they been immense or they startle you? I
wouldn't say they startle me, but I would say that they have been immense, yes.
I think they've been immense in two different areas. The most dramatic change
perhaps has been in the medium itself, the medium of expression for science
fiction. You have to remember that at the time I began to read and write science
fiction, there weren't any science fiction books. The only science fiction
really was in magazines, and if it ever came out in book form, it was never
promoted as science fiction. It is now totally changed, and it has changed not
just in terms of moving from magazines to books, But in the whole area of the
media, I've got a son, 15 years old, who saw Star Wars 18 times. And to him,
that's what science fiction is. It's something up there on the screen or it's on
a TV set. And I'm afraid that in the future it is increasingly going to move in
that direction, that the kind of science fiction that we knew probably will be
pretty much a dead duck. So it's changed in that regard. The other way it's
changed, although perhaps not as much as many people believe, it has changed
stylistically, of course. I think the writers who are writing science fiction
now are much better writers than they used to be. I don't mean they're better
science fiction writers necessarily, but they're better writers. And the thing
that constantly amazes me are the younger writers in Austin that I associate
with. And I've learned so much from. They're so far ahead of us in terms of
where we were at the same age that there's simply no comparison. So that's the
other side of the coin. Maybe we're getting better. Maybe we'll survive in spite
of ourselves. But you don't look at yourself as a dinosaur that's becoming
extinct. No, I hope not.
I think that probably it's a mistake to ask any writer to evaluate their own
work or their place in the medium or what have you because we all tend to
exaggerate how important we are. But I can tell you for what it's worth that
I've written some things that I can go back and read with pleasure. and I've
written some things that I think are as good as possibly anybody wrote in
science fiction. But I can also tell you that I can go back and read some other
things that I did that I just as soon had never been published and I hope nobody
ever reads. But no, I don't think of myself as a dinosaur. Old, yes, but not a
dinosaur. I meant the type of science fiction.